Hi everyone, and welcome to the Contest
Report for the ICFP Programming Contest 2021
My name is Jasper and this year I
organized the contest together with Alex
So the ICFP Programming Contest has been
hosted every year since 1998.
The contest  happens over 72 hours and usually there's
a 24-hour lightning division.
The languages used by the top participants become
officially recognized by the contest
and so our winners get very important bragging
rights.  We sort of think of this as the
most fun serious programming contest around
because of its variety and low barrier to entry
I'm saying low barrier to entry because there's no financial entry fee.
Logistics are easy it's always organized
online there's no need to form a team there's no
pre-selections or no need to be a student.
Of course participating is more important than winning,
but on the other hand it's still
a serious contest with complex problems each year
and some of the participants are
among the best competitive programmers.
So one of the cool aspects of the ICFP
Programming Contest is that the organizer changed
year after year and this leads a lot of
variety in the subject matters addressed in the contest.
Typically the contests
often end up being a player versus player
AI tournament or where participants have to write
bots or some sort of complex optimization problems
often there's also a lot of
reverse engineering involved
on the slide here you can see a rundown
of the contest for the previous few years
And to go to even more recent history in
September 2020 Sukyoung Ryu asked me if we wanted
to organize this year's contest. I immediately
asked Alex because obviously it's not something
you can do alone and I've always participated
in the ICFP Programming Contest with him.
We didn't really know what this involved and we got in touch
with Ilya Sergey who organized the contest in 2019.
He's been very responsive throughout the year
whenever we had questions about practical things.
There was never really a lack of ideas but
many of the ideas we had were underdeveloped,
because we were afraid of putting in too
much effort into something that turned out
to be maybe too easy or not entertaining
in the end.
By december 2020 we were
quite excited about doing something with
non-euclidean geometry
since it hadn't been done in the ICFP Contest
before and visually it's quite interesting.
However, we decided that it was not
a good fit for a programming contest since
the complicated geometry makes it very hard
for an easy first simple solution to be made.
But since we thought it was
an interesting idea we ended up making
a cute web game uh that we published earlier
this year.  But going getting back to the contest
on March 1st we realized that the the contest
date was fast approaching and so we wrote down
some of our selection criteria to
help us decide which problem to choose.
So we ended up with the following criteria:
we wanted the problem to be hard so it has enough
depth for very serious competitors.
Implementing it should be fun for all participants even if
you're not doing very well: participating is more
important than winning.
In this sort of sense it should be easy to get started
by submitting a very bad solution so you can
just get started easily, even if your
solutions aren't very good initially.
Of course there should be a nice visualization
aspect, and we would also really prefer it if
you could explain the problem really fast,
in two minutes or less.
After we considered all of these criteria for the ideas that we had
written down we started iterating and expanding
on the Brain-Wall idea. We also eliminated a
lot of ideas even though because they were very
interesting we didn't really know if maybe there
was this very fast and easy algorithm,
and just studying that would take a
significant time investment on its own.
We also had some thematic criteria: we wanted to
avoid sort of games around fighting or war.
Preferably it had to be something
hilarious, something comic.
The problem we chose was inspired by
Brain-Wall it's a segment from a Japanese TV show.
The idea is that the styrofoam wall moves
towards the participant and they must strike
a pose that allows them to pass through the
wall or else they get pushed into water.
This is a problem that we would give
participants, based on the TV show picture we just saw.
One thing we immediately noticed is
that just making the figure fit through the
hole is not enough. Most of the formulations that
we came up with would allow people just to
sort of crumple into a small ball and fit through
that way.  So we added the additional
notion that risk should be awarded and if you
strike a pose and you cover more of the grid
and you stretch out more to reach all the
edges you should be rewarded for that.
On the slide you can basically see our
problem definition. The constraints were that
edges can't be stretched or compressed too much
and the figure has to be completely within
the hole, including the boundary.
It was important for us to work with integers
so we don't suffer from accumulating
floating point inaccuracies when judging solutions.
Having our problem be defined on integers also
pushes us into the realm of discrete optimization
or integer programming, which is generally
harder than their continuous counterparts.
As you can see the problem
definition is very concise. It basically just
fits on a single slide. We did consider
a number of other formulae, such as using filled
area for scoring, or having slightly different,
slightly more complex stretch formulas.
But we decided that the formulae shown here
gave us a good trade-off between having the
problem be interesting and visually intuitive.
And even though the specification sounds
simple, there are a lot of sub problems that
are much harder than they seem. One of these
is for example determining if a line segment
lays within a polygon, which I'm sure many of
our participants will remember very well.
If you don't count the boundary of the polygon
as inside this is actually a rather easy problem.
You just need to test if one point is inside
and that the line segment doesn't
intersect with the polygon. However since the
boundary counts as inside it's a lot harder
and this also matters in practice since
our goal function awards putting points of
the figure close to the boundary to take more
risk. Solving this has a lot of edge cases
so maybe it's a bit much to go through now but
basically you don't only need to check if
lines intersect but also how and where and what
sort of angle and then representing angles is
additionally a little tricky since we're using
integer math and not just floating point numbers.
This is a possible solution to the problem
we showed earlier. As you can see there's no
requirement for the figure to remain planar
and this helps us keep the specification simple.
We're also super proud of this animation but
maybe less proud of how much time we spent on that.
We had this dashboard where you could submit
problems and view your submissions. You can
look at your best scores. This dashboard
is still up and running though it's on a
smaller instance now, but you can go and give it
a look. We also added an HTTP API so people could
sort of submit solutions in a more
programmatic fashion more easily.
Then we had a scoring formula that
assigns a score per team per problem. It's based
on the difficulty of the problem and also what
the best currently known solution is among all teams.
This formula places a lot of importance
on problems where there is a perfect solution.
If other teams find this perfect solution you
also need to do the same to to stay in the game.
At the beginning of the contest we
released just a limited set of 59 problems.
Then we gradually added more
problems throughout the contest.
This allowed us to gauge how participants were
doing. We would release more or harder problems
when we thought the participants
were doing well, or if we thought that
there was not enough differentiation
between the top participants.
Many of our problems were hand-drawn. We created
the tool that allowed us to just parse SVG files
and write this out as problem files. That way we
could just draw things in inkscape which was neat.
One of the things we always appreciated about
the ICFP Contest is how they would often make
references to older contests. We tried to
incorporate this as well. We went through the
old contests and dug up some images that we found.
We couldn't do this for all contests since there's
many of them and a lot of them are just text-based
but it was still a lot of fun. This is the logo
from the Cult of the Bound Variable based on
an image that appeared in the original codex
and that we traced in inkscape. We also have Endo
the alien from ICFP 2007 in Utrecht.
Endo is trying to get home in his spaceship.
We have the crane origami reference to the ICFP
Programming Contest in 2016. It was interesting
to us how just sorting through the
images and drawing them leads to lots of
interesting problems. I like this picture
especially because it's inherently visually
very similar to one of the problems from
2016 but yet the way you would go about solving
it in its new context is is very different.
This is the worker-wrapper robot, working in
the Lambda mines to prevent bit-rot from 2019.
One of the interesting aspects of this figure
is that it has three long limbs you can use
to reach the far away corners of the hole.
Of course we didn't only have a hand-drawn problems.
In addition to our hand-drawn problems
we developed several algorithms to generate random problems.
Our generator was quite customizable and took
many configuration parameters as you can on the slides.
This resulted in many different
styles of problems. Out of the generated problems
it also generated many problems that were
either too easy or too boring. We had to
spend quite a bit of time manually hand picking
the problems which we thought were interesting.
Our generator was only able to produce
problems which have a valid solution
but one important distinction which we didn't
really realize was going to be so important
was that some problems have solutions which
with zero dislikes and other problems don't.
As you'll see later on some teams were able
to recognize which problems were which and use
different strategies depending on if they thought
the the problem had a zero dislike solution.
It's often customary in the ICFP Programming
Contest that after the first 24 hours of the
contest, the lightning division, new rules are
introduced. I think this variety is also
one of the things I like about the contest.
We wanted to add rules that weren't too disruptive
so people didn't have to completely throw away
their code. We also wanted something that
was more or less optional. This was a bit
inspired by the bonuses in 2019 where you could
pick up items on the map for your worker-wrapper robots.
However we thought it would be more interesting
if bonuses would unlock advantages not in the
problem you picked them up, but in other problems.
This way you often have to make this trade-off
if you want to slightly improve your score or
actually get a slightly worse score on the current
problem to possibly improve your score on another
problem by unlocking a bonuses. So you really need
to be looking at the big picture and not just
sort of problem per problem. What is even more
interesting is that it turned out to be reasonably
simple to write validation logic for this that
allows for cyclic dependencies in the bonuses
in between problems. We were very curious
about how participants were going to approach that.
We ended up introducing four types of
bonuses during the duration of the contest.
All the bonuses allow you
to gain some small advantage
but they aren't really enough to make
you win just on their own,
if your solver is not very good
at solving the rest of the problem.
The new bonuses were added at the 24 36 and 48 hour marks.
Whenever we added bonuses we also modified the
existing problems to include those bonuses.
We added new problems at the same time as well.
Let's talk about internals just for a little bit.
We had this sort of big mono repository in
Haskell that contained around 12 different
tools for various things and most importantly
the judge and the web portal. Around 8000 lines,
and there was this focus on correctness of course.
Not on speed because even if we wrote
the judge in kind a slow way,
checking that solutions are correct is still a lot
faster than generating solutions to the problems.
This code is all open source by the way.
You can find it on our website. We used nix to build
Docker images based on these these Haskell
tools and we had three of these images running
on Amazon AWS: one database instance,
one machine running the web portal,
and one machine running the judge.
Our infrastructure was sponsored by Fugue.
It was important for us to separate the
judge from the web portal. This ensured that
people could try to DDOS the web portal but
not the judge itself. We didn't really have
any issues throughout the contest. At one point
the judging became slower and we added another
judging machine, but then fixed the actual issue,
which was some indices we were missing from
the database. After we did that everything
was fine again and we were able to scale down.
We also had a separate GitHub pages site to
host a bunch of static things, and we set up
a Discord instance because we really liked
the social aspect of last year's Contest
where participants could kind of discuss with
each other without giving too much away.
We used a private one for organizing and then
public one for the participants to socialize.
In total 73 226 solutions were
submitted and 214 teams took part.
The teams were from all over the world,
but primarily from the US, Russia and Japan.
272 distinct bonuses were used by the teams.
On average teams solved or submitted valid solutions
for 55 out of 132 puzzles.
We also took a look at the puzzles that teams
had the most trouble with solving.
So problems that we had the least
amount of valid solutions for among teams.
Less than 50 teams
were able to solve these puzzles
so congrats to those who did.
The third place is shared by an octopus and a reference
to the paper Functional Programming with
Bananas Lenses Envelopes and Barbed Wire.
The two hardest puzzles
were both randomly generated.
One is this figure with a convex hole around that
needs to be fit in this strangely shaped hole.
The hardest puzzle was just a very big randomly
generated one that looks complex and funky.
So we we were surprised by how many people
appeared to solve problems manually with the
help of tools that they developed.
We were quite pleased by this because
it signified a departure from the usual
challenge of programming good solvers,
to instead programming good tools.
Another surprise was a team that allegedly used FreeCAD
to model the problem and create a solver,
which we thought was very ingenious.
This is the part we've all been waiting for.
We'll introduce the winners one by one, starting with
the Judges Prize. Each team will then have a chance
to give a short explanation of their solution.
And the judge's price goes to...
manarimo! After going through the submitted
source code and solutions we've awarded the
Judges Prize to team manarimo. We picked them
for their interesting use of Linear Programming
they used to pick out bonuses, as well as the
creative use of those bonuses for other problems.
Hello everyone, we are Manarimo. it's an honor
for us to give a presentation at 2021 ICFP.
In this presentation, firstly I'll introduce
our team members. Secondly, I will tell you
how we tackled the problem. Thirdly, I will
show you our visualizer as well as dashboard.
Finally, I'll explain how we
managed the bonuses. Let's begin.
This is our team members and this
is our approach. For small problems,
we backtracked all possible arrangements of
verses and took the best one. For problems
known having the score 0 solution or seemingly
having the score 0 solution, we used our hands
to find the best one. Otherwise, we repetitively
applied the simulated annealing and manual tweaks.
For simulated annealing, as penalties we use
the distance of vertices outside from the hole,
the number of edges not fitting the hole, the
error in edge length from the constraints.
These penalties are weighted
and added to the dislike score.
As initial states for the simulated annealing,
we use rotated or flipped original posture.
This is our visualizer. You can move vertices. You
can see whether an edge satisfies the constraints
based on the color. And if it exists, this
visualizer will tell you the best position
of the vertex where all connected
edges satisfy the constraints.
These solutions are managed on the git
and our script generates this dashboard.
let me explain how we handle the bonus. So as you
know, for each problem, we can decide whether we
use a bonus, we take bonuses, we use a bonus to
take bonuses, and to maximize the submission score
we need to find the best combination. To find it
we use the integer programming solver called PuLP.
That's all from us finally we'd like to give
a huge kudos to organizers for holding
such amazing high quality competitions. We've
really enjoyed solving the Brain Wall problems.
Thanks for watching.
For the Third prize...
Special Weekend takes the Third prize!
But not only that: they also are the
winner of the Lightning Division!
Congratulations to them! Here's a short
video that they made explaining their solution.
Hello everyone!
We participated the contest as team
“Special Weekend” with 7 members shown here.
We used Rust language for the backend solvers,
while typescript and Go were
used for the human-interaction.
Types saved us the day.
Our team was named after a pun on a racehorse,
a Japanese game, and of course the contest
proper, which was held on a weekend of July.
We made several solvers during the contest. The
main solver was based on the simulated annealing
method. More than 95% of the submissions from
our team were based on solutions generated
by this solver. The left panel visualizes
how solutions are searched in our solver.
In this game, we need to find
solutions satisfying two constraints:
(1) all vertices must be inside the hole, and
(2) edge lengths have distance restraints.
We achieved these goals by
always keeping the constraint 1
and converting the constraint 2 to the
penalty terms in the score calculation.
In the simulated annealing method, each cycle
the solver proposes a new, slightly modified
solution from the current one. Then the
algorithm probabilistically chooses whether
to accept the new solution. We used several
types of proposals, which we call neighbors,
in the solver. Three major choices of neighbors
are shown here, moving a vertex, moving an edge,
and moving an entire triangle to find
a better solution than the current one.
Ideally the solver programs should produce the
best possible poses, but it's not practical,
especially for the lightning division.
We need manual labor to some extent.
In this year's contest, we've created a UI
that assists humans to explore possible poses.
You can move the vertices on a browser and
visualize the constraints and shows the score.
The hand-crafted poses were good candidates
for the initial input to the solver programs.
This is written in TypeScript.
With this hand solver and the solver programs,
we get many possible poses. We've created
a server for collecting those poses
and showing the best ones. This is written
in Go, MySQL, React, and TypeScript.
The Second prize in the Full Division goes to...
Unagi! A familiar name in the ICFP
Programming Contest Community.
Congratulations to them! They
also have a short video explaining their solution.
Hi, I am Takuya Akiba from Team Unagi.
Today, I am going to present our
solution for this year's ICFP contest.
First of all, this is a rough sketch of
our solution overview. To solve problems,
we created several automatic solvers. In addition,
we also solved some problems manually starting
from partial solutions generated by solvers.
We developed our own solution server to manage
solutions. Solvers continuously try to improve
solutions through interaction with the
solution server. The bonus selector optimizes
the combination of bonuses and submits the
whole solution set to the official portal.
For some problems, we can achieve 0
dislike value. Due to the scoring rule,
it is very important to achieve 0 dislikes for
these problems. So, we developed approaches to
exactly solve these problems. One approach is
to conduct backtracking searches with pruning.
We used backtracking searches to find
complete 0 dislike solutions as well as
partial solutions for heuristic
solvers and manual work.
One of the successful pruning approaches
was to use shortest path distances.
Like other teams, we solved a few problems by
hand. To that end, we developed a dedicated
GUI tool. It equips intuitive
visualization of unsatisfied constraints.
This tool was also developed in
rust and compiled to WebAssembly.
The other problems are solved
by heuristic approaches
that aim to achieve as small dislike values
as possible. The main heuristic approach
was simulated annealing. During the
search, instead of hard constraints,
we used soft constraints by introducing
penalties in the scoring function.
In addition to simulated annealing, we also
used SAT solvers. We translated the problem
to improve the score while satisfying all
constraints into a SAT instance. We improved
scores by repeatedly solving SAT instances
by using state-of-the-art SAT solver Glucose.
We used plenty of computation power to run
these solvers. We used Google Compute Engine.
For solving our own solution server we also used
modern managed services such as Google Cloud Run.
Thank you for listening
All right, and finally the first prize goes to...
the awesome hackers from RGBTeam.
Congratulations! Here's their
video explaining their solution.
Hello everyone, my name is Roman Udovichenko. I'm
from RGBteam and I want to share with you some
of the ideas of our solution to this year's ICFPC
problem. The main idea was to use manual solution,
so one of the first things that we did at the
contest was to get the application that allows
manual vertices dragging and highlights edges or
vertices that are bad because of their position
or length. As far as fully manual solving is
boring and quite ineffective, we programmed a
lot of so-called helpers. and one of the main
helpers was using the idea of springs and
at every iteration this helper shrinked the edges
with lengths less than required and expanded
the edges with lengths more than required
and we could do as many iterations as we want
until we get desired result. and
one of the useful modifications
allowed to fix positions of some vertices and they
remained in place during this spring simulation.
Another great helper was called fixer and its
idea was to take a solution with a few invalid
edges and do some sort of local optimizations to
create a fully valid solution. This helper was
used after manual fixes and greatly reduced amount
of manual work at the final stage of constructing
the solution because when there are one or
two invalid edges and you are struggling a lot
in order to get them correct so you spend
a lot of time on it then this helper fixer
was very very useful. And then there were
different local optimization helpers to improve
the score and they all took a valid solution and
tried to modify it in some way to get another
valid solution with a better score. So the whole
process was like this: we take the test case,
we construct any valid solution manually, and then
we improve it with different local optimizations
or heuristics, and then we maybe modify it
manually in order to jump from local minima and
then we improve it again with local optimization
and we repeat this process until we are tired.
So what about these optimizations.
We used a lot of them:
Starting from take one vertex try to move it
up down left right and see if score improves.
Also, we used brute force for small
subsets: so we take some nearby vertices.
Something about three or four or maybe seven
depending on the test case and this brute force
fixed all vertices except this
selected subset and then tried to find
the best positions for selected vertices.
One of the main heuristics was simulated
annealing. It gave a lot of best results
for many of the test cases. We also run it with
different parameters and some worked well for
one test cases, some for another,
so we experimented with it a lot.
One more helper was brute force
that tried to find the solution
with zero score and there were a lot of
heuristics to make it work fast enough and
it worked really well for some of the test
cases, and we achieved a perfect score on them.
At last, we did not use bonuses at all and
didn't consider them during optimizations
except for a few cases where we manually collected
GLOBALIST bonus and used it in order to
get improvement in corresponding cases.
I think that's it. Thank you
for your attention and goodbye.
For the official documents we would like
to make the following declarations:
C++ and Rust are the programming tools of choice
for discriminating hackers.
Rust is a fine programming tool for many applications.
Rust, TypeScript and Go are also not too shabby.
Rust, TypeScript and go are very
suitable for rapid prototyping.
Last but not least, manarimo are
an extremely cool bunch of hackers.
These four teams though, are not the only teams
that have explained how they approached the problem.
Many other teams have also posted write-ups
on their websites and we've posted links
to these on our homepage, so if you're
interested in that be sure to check it out.
Finally, we'd like to thank the following
people who helped us along the way.
And finally, thank you for listening. If you have
any questions, there should be a Q&A session
and we'll try to answer them.
Thanks.
Thank you.